# Patterns-in-pollination-networks-from-a-grassland-forest-ecotone
Data base and R script from the manuscript in preparation "Habitat and population structure determine patterns of plant-pollinator networks of an endangered palm tree in a grassland-forest ecotone"

Autorship: Mateus Raguse-Quadros a*, Gabriela da Cunha Souza b, Pedro Maria Abreu Ferreira c, Betina Blochtein a a Laboratório de Entomologia, Escola de Ciências da Saúde e da Vida, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; b Secretaria Estadual do Meio Ambiente e Infraestrutura do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; c Laboratório de Ecologia de Interações, Escola de Ciências da Saúde e da Vida, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. *Corresponding author. E-mail address: mateusraguse@hotmail.com (M. Raguse-Quadros); gabriela.cunha.souza@hotmail.com (G.daC. Souza); pedro.abreu@pucrs.br (P.M.A Ferreira); betinabl@gmail.com (B. Blochtein)

Abstract Pollen transport by insects determines patterns of reproductive encounters between plants with flowers that have spatially or temporally segregated sexes. Pollinators show varied responses to environmental gradients such as those found in grassland-forest ecotones. Individual-based interaction networks are useful yet underexplored tools to understand how interactions vary across these gradients. Interactions between plant individuals and their pollinators directly reflect on plants fitness and genetic structure, seminal attributes for the conservation of endangered species. To test how a grassland-forest ecotone gradient can affect these interactions we studied pollination networks of Butia odorata individuals, an extinction-threatened palm tree from remnant palm grove ecosystems in South America. We evaluated how network metrics (specialization and modularity), and pollinator richness respond to gradients of habitat and population structure in a grassland-forest ecotone. Networks with more isolated palm trees showed greater specialization and modularity. Pollinator richness was dependent on the habitat context and pollinator role: peripheral pollinators were negatively affected by palm density, whereas core pollinators were positively affected by tree cover, which in turn was positively associated with palm density and proximity to the forest. Our results indicated that increased tree cover in the grassland matrix can promote pollinator diversity by decreasing the dominance of core species. Palm density may hamper the movement of pollinators pollen transportation, playing a key role for the conservation of B. odorata and for palm grove ecosystems. Finally, we emphasize the need of protocols that include traditional grassland management to achieve tree and palm tree density that maximizes conservation results. Keywords: Butia odorata · Butia palm grove · modularity · Pampa · pollen transport · specialization

Contents of each file:

ms_publi.R
R script of the analyzes reported in the work.

PolC.txt
Database for analysis of ecological interactions network between individuals and their pollinator species in 15 interaction networks.

Matrix code legend: higher: higher trophic level of the network, in here the pollinator species* lower: lower trophic level of the network, in here the individuals of (Butx.y: x: identity of network/sampling point; y: identity of the <B. odorata> individual) webID: Identity assigned to each of the 15 networks/sampling point freq: number of individuals of each pollinator species collected from each palm tree

*pollinator species names: ThySp. = Thynnidae sp.; ApiMel = ; AgaSp. = sp.; LasSp. = sp.; MisSp. = sp.; AllSp. = sp.; PalSp. = sp.; PolCav = ; PolSp. = <Polybia (Trichinothoras)> sp.; PolVer = ; PalSp.1 = sp. 1; DiaSp.1 = cf. sp. 1; PolIgn = ; CopSp. = sp.; CopSp.1 = sp. 1; MusSp. = Muscidae cf. sp.; CalPet = <Callonychium (Callonychium)> cf. ; DioSp. = cf. sp.; AgiSp. = Augochlorini sp.; ExoSp. = cf. <(Exomalopsis)> sp.; AgaSp.1 = cf. sp. 1; PseSp. = sp.; AgiSp.1 = Augochlorini sp. 1; BraSp. = sp.; MusSp.1 = Muscidae sp. 1; CanSp.1 = Cantharidae sp. 1; MorSp. = Mordellidae cf. sp.; NitSp. = Nitidulidae sp.; ThySp.1 = Thynnidae sp. 1; SphSp. = cf. sp.; ExoTri = <Exomalopsis (Phanomalopsis)> cf. ; AgaSp.3 = cf. sp. 3; AugSp. = sp.; HalSp. = sp.; ExoSp.1 = cf. <(Exomalopsis)> sp. 1; AgaSp.2 = cf. sp. 2; Meg(C)Sp. = cf. <(Chrysosarus)> sp.; PolCar = ;

inex_polxindvTP.txt
Community matrix with the abundance of pollinators species per sampling point used in the rarefaction analysis (same pollinators species list than in "PolC.txt").

-Models.txt

Matrix with predictor and response variables used in Structural Equation Models

Matrix code legend: Numbers in the lines: identificaiton of each sampling point; riqM: Average richness of pollinators per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) of each point; abdPM: Average pollinator abundance per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) at each point; riqPh: Average richness of peripheral pollinators per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) of each point; abdPh: Average abundance of peripheral pollinators per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) at each point; riqCr: Average richness of core pollinators per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) of each point; abdCr: Average abundance of core pollinators per inflorescence (individual of <B. odorata>) at each point; H2: Specialization index ("H2'" metric from the "bipartite" package in R software) of each interaction network of <B. odorata> individuals with their pollinator species; Mod_zs: Modularity index ("Q" metric from the "bipartite" package in R software) of each interaction network of <B. odorata> individuals with their pollinator species; DistMedBorda: Mean distance per sample point of each focal <B. odorata> individual from the forest edge; nButHa: Number of <B. odorata> individuals at the sample point; CArboPlog: Percentage of tree cover at the sample point; DistVMed: Isolation (mean distance) of focal <B. odorata> individuals from their four closest conspecifics at the sample point
